# Lab 2: Configuration Management with Ansible - Alternative assignment

This document contains a variant of lab 2.7 where you configure a router for the network using a VyOS router VM instead of Cisco. You can make 

## 2.7. Managing a router with Ansible (VyOS version)

Next, we will add a router VM to the virtual environment, based on [VyOS](https://vyos.io). VyOS is a Linux-based network operating system. That implies that it also satisfies the necessary requirements for managing it with Ansible, viz. SSH access and Python. Indeed, Ansible has ample [documentation on how to manage VyOS routers](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/vyos/vyos/index.html).

Additionally, VyOS has some similarities to other well-known network operating systems like Cisco IOS or Juniper OS in the way it is configured. You can familiarize yourself with the specific commands that you will need for this assignment using the [online documentation](https://docs.vyos.io/en/equuleus/).

Before downloading a VyOS base box and creating a VM, you should first install the `vagrant-vyos` plugin. This plugin provides the necessary configuration to create a VyOS VM with Vagrant.

```bash
vagrant plugin install vagrant-vyos
```

In addition, the Vagrant base box provided by the VyOS project does not comply with the convention that there should be a user `vagrant` with password `vagrant` present. Instead, the default user is `vyos` with password `vyos`. Our `Vagrantfile` does not support setting another SSH username and password, so we'll need to implement this. Fortunately, it suffices to add the following two lines to the `Vagrantfile`, [after line 95](https://github.com/HoGentTIN/infra-labs/blob/a7cbd21aae9c0a4f68756df2758133cda6b0906f/vmlab/Vagrantfile#L95):

```ruby
      # Allow setting a custom SSH username and password
      node.ssh.username = host['ssh_username'] if host.key? 'ssh_username'
      node.ssh.password = host['ssh_password'] if host.key? 'ssh_password'   
```

### 2.7.1. Create and boot the router VM

Add an entry to the `vagrant-hosts.yml` file to create a new VM for the router. Select `vyos/current` as the base box and assign the IP address that can be found in the address table at the beginning of the lab assignment. Add keys `ssh_username` and `ssh_password` with the appropriate values. Boot the VM with `vagrant up`.

### 2.7.2. Check the default configuration

Log in to the router VM with `vagrant ssh r001` and check the IP settings. On VyOS, the command is `show interfaces`. Verify that it has the correct IP addresses for both interfaces.

```console
vyos@r001:~$ show interfaces
Codes: S - State, L - Link, u - Up, D - Down, A - Admin Down
Interface        IP Address                        S/L  Description
---------        ----------                        ---  -----------
eth0             10.0.2.15/24                      u/u
eth1             172.16.255.254/16                 u/u
lo               127.0.0.1/8                       u/u
                 ::1/128
```

### 2.7.3. Managing the router with Ansible

In order to manage this VM with Ansible, we will need to update the inventory file. Add a new group `routers` and add an entry for the router VM:

```yaml
---
servers:
  # ...
routers:
  hosts:
    r001:
      ansible_host: 172.16.255.254
      ansible_user: vyos
      ansible_ssh_pass: vyos
      ansible_network_os: vyos
      ansible_connection: network_cli
```

Check whether the VM is reachable with Ansible:

```console
[vagrant@control ansible]$ ansible -i inventory.yml r001 -m ping
[WARNING]: ansible-pylibssh not installed, falling back to paramiko
r001 | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
```

(the warning can be ignored)

Check if you can retrieve facts about the router with the `vyos_facts` module:

```console
[vagrant@control ansible]$ ansible -i inventory.yml r001 -m vyos_facts
```

### 2.7.4 Writing the playbook

Now, we will create the playbook to actually configure our router. Create a file `router-config.yml` in the `ansible/` directory. You could add the tasks to `site.yml`, but since the router is a different type of device, it makes sense to keep it separate.

The playbook should contain the following tasks:

- Set the IP address of the internal interface (in fact, Vagrant already did that, but we'll do it again for the sake of the exercise)
- Add a description to both interfaces, label them `LAN` and `WAN` respectively.
- Set the host name of the router
- Enable NAT on the router
- (Optional) Set a port forwarding rule that forwards HTTP/HTTPS traffic on the appropriate ports to the web server.
- (Optional) Enable the firewall on the router. Only allow traffic that is initiated from the LAN to the WAN. Allow no direct traffic from the WAN to hosts on the LAN.

Don't write all tasks at once! Implement a single change and execute the playbook with the command below. Check whether the change was applied correctly before moving on to the next task.

```console
ansible-playbook -i inventory.yml router-config.yml 
```

Finally, make sure the running configuration is not lost after rebooting the router!

### 2.7.5. Possible extensions

- Configure the firewall on the router, implement a suitable security policy for the network.
