# Lab 2: Configuration Management with Ansible - Configuring Cisco equipment

This document contains a variant of lab 2.7 where you configure a router for the network using a Cisco router VM instead of VyOS. At this time (fall 2023), the router VMs provided by Cisco Academy are broken when used on the latest VirtualBox version (>=7.0). Until this is fixed by Cisco, it is not possible to implement this assignment.

## 2.7. Router

In the previous parts of this lab assignment, we set up several machines that, when put together, can form a fully functioning local network. There's still a component missing, and that is the router that connects this network with the outside world. So, next, we are going to set up a router and configure it using Ansible.

There are some Vagrant base boxes for router OSs, but most don't work very well. So, for the purpose of this lab assignment, we will have to configure the VM manually. We'll be using a Cisco IOS VM (CSR1000v). If you are enrolled in a Cisco NetAcad academy, you should have access to the following files:

- `VirtualBox ETW-CSR1000v.ova`: base VirtualBox appliance
- `csr1000v-universalk9.17.03.02.iso` (or a newer version), the installation ISO for Cisco IOS

Be aware that the router VM takes 4 GB of RAM!

### 2.7.1. Create and boot the router VM

- Import the OVA file in VirtualBox and, optionally, put it in the `vmlab` group (that was automatically created by Vagrant)
- Copy or move the .iso file to the directory that contains the VM (should be something like `${HOME}/VirtualBox VMs/vmlab/CSR1000v`, with `${HOME}` your user's home directory, i.e. `c:\Users\USERNAME` on Windows, `/Users/USERNAME` on Mac or `/home/USERNAME` on Linux).
- Edit the Network settings of the VM.
    - By default, you should have a single active network adapter. Attach it to a NAT interface. After booting, an IP address will be assigned by DHCP (which one?)
    - Enable Adapter 2 and attach it to the Host-only network interface that is also used by your other VMs in this environment. After booting, these interfaces will be set to "administratively down".
    - The Adapter Type must be set to **Paravirtualized Network (virtio-net)**
- Boot the VM. You should see a GRUB boot menu. Choose the default option or wait until it is selected automatically.
- The installation process will now begin. This will probably take a while! The VM will reboot once and the installation-ISO will be ejected. If everything went ok, you should see the following text:

```text
*                                           *
**                                         **
***                                       ***
***  Cisco Networking Academy             ***
***   Emerging Technologies Workshop:     ***
***    Model Driven Programmability       ***
***                                       ***
***  This software is provided for        ***
***   Educational Purposes                ***
***    Only in Networking Academies       ***
***                                       ***
**                                         **
*                                           *

CSR1kv>
```

### 2.7.2. Check the default configuration

Verify the router configuration by showing an overview of the network interfaces and the routing table. Check the port forwarding rules on the NAT interface. Specifically, find on what port SSH traffic is forwarded to. Verify that you can log in on your router with SSH by opening a Bash terminal on your physical system and executing the following command (replace PORT by the forwarded SSH port number of the VM's NAT adapter), and using password `cisco123!`:

```console
$ ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -p PORT cisco@127.0.0.1
Password: 

*                                           *
**                                         **
***                                       ***
***  Cisco Networking Academy             ***
***   Emerging Technologies Workshop:     ***
***    Model Driven Programmability       ***
***                                       ***
***  This software is provided for        ***
***   Educational Purposes                ***
***    Only in Networking Academies       ***
***                                       ***
**                                         **
*                                           *

CSR1kv#
```

### 2.7.3. Managing the router with Ansible

In order to manage this VM with Ansible, we will need to update the inventory file. Add a new group `routers` and add the following host to it:

```yaml
---
servers:
  # ...
routers:
  hosts:
    CSR1kv:
      ansible_connection: "ansible.netcommon.network_cli"
      ansible_network_os: "ios"
      ansible_host: "127.0.0.1"
      ansible_port: 5022
      ansible_user: "cisco"
      ansible_password: "cisco123!"
```

Test whether this works by executing the following command:

```console
ansible -i inventory.yml -m ios_facts -a "gather_subset=all" all
```

You should get a lot of output with an overview of the router's configuration in JSON format.

### 2.7.4. Writing the playbook

Now, we will create the playbook to actually configure our router. Create a file `router-config.yml` in the `ansible/` directory (the one containing the `site.yml` playbook).

```console
# Router configuration playbook
---
- hosts: CSR1kv
  tasks:
    - name: Set interface GE2
      cisco.ios.ios_l3_interfaces:
        config:
          - name: GigabitEthernet2
            ipv4:
              - address: IP_ADDRESS
        state: merged
    - name: Enable GE2
      cisco.ios.ios_interfaces:
        config:
          - name: GigabitEthernet2
            enabled: yes
        state: merged
```

Replace IP_ADDRESS with the actual IP address, in CIDR notation, the router should have.

Now, execute the playbook with:

```console
ansible-playbook -i inventory.yml router-config.yml 
```

from the directory containing your inventory file and router config playbook. Verify that this works by pinging the IP address of the router from any of the VMs in your environment and from the physical system. Also check the router's configuration from the IOS console.

Change the playbook so the Router hostname is set to `r001`. Execute the playbook and verify the result.

Finally, make sure the running configuration is not lost after rebooting the router. Add a new task to the playbook, execute it and verify that you're still able to ping the router from e.g. your physical machine.
